PEP 774: Removing the LLVM requirement for JIT builds (#4234)
python/peps: peps/pep-0774.rst

PEP: 774
Title: Removing the LLVM requirement for JIT builds

> Author: Savannah Ostrowski <savannah@python.org>

Author: I didn't add `Discussions-To` quite yet since I wanted to 1) have the PEP number confirmed and 2) have this merged. If there's an order of operations that is standard here, please let me know.

Reviewer: Yeah. I think that's pretty standard (updating with a link to the thread right after).

Reviewer 2: Yep, this is the usual way 👍 

The other way is to, _just before_ merge, open the thread then immediately update the PR and merge.

(The not recommended way is to open the thread with the RTD preview at the same time the PR is open, as that thread can live a long time and the preview link will eventually 404.)

And confirming 774 for this PEP (it has nice symmetry with [744](https://peps.python.org/pep-0744/) :)

size.

It is important to note that this PEP is not a proposal to accept or reject the
JIT itself but rather to determine whether the build-time dependency on LLVM is
acceptable for JIT builds moving forward. If this PEP is rejected, we will
proceed with the status quo, retaining the LLVM build-time requirement. While
this dependency has served the JIT development process effectively thus far, it
introduces setup complexity and additional challenges that this PEP seeks to
alleviate.

Motivation
==========

At the Python Core Developer Sprint that took place in September 2024, there was
discussion about the next steps for the JIT - a related discussion also took
place on `GitHub <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/115869>`__. As part
of that discussion, there was also a clear appetite for removing the LLVM
requirement for JIT builds in preparation for shipping the JIT off by default in
3.14. The consensus at the sprint was that it would be sufficient to provide
pre-generated stencils for non-debug builds for Tier 1 platforms and that
checking these files into the CPython repo would be adequate for the limited

> number of platforms (though more options have been explored; see Rejected
> Ideas).

Reviewer 2: We can link to it like:
```suggestion
number of platforms (though more options have been explored; see `Rejected
Ideas <PEP 774 Rejected Ideas_>`__).
```

want to make sure that the friction to work on JIT-related code is minimized as
much as possible.

With the proposed approach, hosting pre-compiled stencils for supported
architectures can be generated in advance, stored in a central location, and
automatically used during builds. This approach ensures reproducible builds,
making the JIT a more stable and sustainable part of CPython’s future.

Rationale
=========

This PEP proposes checking JIT stencils directly into the CPython repo as the
best path forward for eliminating our build-time dependency on LLVM.

This approach: 

* Provides the best end-to-end experience for those looking to build CPython 
  with the JIT
* Lessens the barrier to entry for those looking to contribute to the JIT 
* Ensures builds remain reproducible and consistent across platforms without 
  relying on external infrastructure or download mechanisms 
* Eliminates variability introduced by network conditions or potential
  discrepancies between hosted files and the CPython repository state, and 
* Subjects stencils to the same review processes we have for all other JIT-related
  code

> However, this approach does result in a slight increase in overall

Reviewer 2: Should this paragraph (or somewhere else) mention the current total size of the stencils?

repository size. Comparing repo growth on commits over the past 90 days, the 
difference between the actual commits and the same commits with stencils added

> amounts to a difference of 0.03MB per stencil file. This is a small increase in
> the context of the overall repository size, which has grown by 2.55MB in the
> same time period. For six stencil files, this amounts to an upper bound of 0.18MB.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
amounts to a difference of 0.03 MB per stencil file. This is a small increase in
the context of the overall repository size, which has grown by 2.55 MB in the
same time period. For six stencil files, this amounts to an upper bound of 0.18 MB.
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Precompiled JIT stencil files will be stored in the ``Tools/jit/stencils``
directory, with each file name corresponding to its target triple as outlined
above. At build time, we determine whether to use the checked in stencils or to
generate a new stencil for the user’s platform. Specifically, for contributors
with LLVM installed, the ``build.py`` script in ``Tools/jit/stencils`` will allow
them to regenerate the stencil for their platform. Those without LLVM can rely
on the precompiled stencil files directly from the repository. 

Working on the JIT’s implementation (or touching JIT files)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In CI, stencil files will be automatically validated and updated when changes
are made to JIT-related files. When a pull request is opened that touches these
files, the ``jit.yml`` workflow, which builds and tests our builds, will run as
usual. 

However, as part of this, we will introduce a new step that diffs the current
stencils in the repo against those generated in CI. If there is a diff for a
platform’s stencil file, a patch file for the updated stencil is generated and

> the step will fail. Each patches is uploaded to GitHub Actions. After CI is

Reviewer 2: Maybe?
```suggestion
the step will fail. Each patch is uploaded to GitHub Actions. After CI is
```

finished running across all platforms, the patches are aggregated into a single
patch file for convenience. You can download this aggregated patch, apply it
locally, and commit the updated stencils back to your branch. Then, the
subsequent CI run will pass.

Reference Implementation
========================

Key parts of the `reference implementation <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/129331>`__ include: 

- |CI|_: The CI workflow responsible for generating stencil patches.

- |jit_stencils|_: The directory where stencils are stored.

- |targets|_: The code to compile and parse the templates at build time.

.. |CI| replace:: ``.github/workflows/jit.yml``
.. _CI: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/.github/workflows/jit.yml

.. |jit_stencils| replace:: ``Tools/jit/stencils``
.. _jit_stencils: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/Tools/jit/stencils

.. |targets| replace:: ``Tools/jit/_targets``
.. _targets: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/Tools/jit/_targets.py

Ignoring the stencils themselves and any necessary JIT README changes, the
changes to the source code to support reproducible stencil generation and

> hosting are minimal (around 150 lines of changes).

Reviewer 2: Or perhaps mention the current total size of the stencils here?

> Rejected Ideas
> ==============

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. _PEP 774 Rejected Ideas:

Rejected Ideas
==============
```

require additional tooling and steps for maintenance, which adds unnecessary
complexity to workflows.

Hosting in a separate repository
--------------------------------

While splitting JIT stencils into a separate repository avoids the storage
overhead associated with hosting the stencils, it adds complexity to the build
process. Additional tooling would be required to fetch the stencils and
potentially create additional and unnecessary failure points in the workflow.
This separation also makes it harder to ensure consistency between the stencils
and the CPython source tree, as updates must be coordinated across the
repositories. Finally, this approach introduces an attack vector, as external
repositories are less integrated with our workflows, making provenance and
integrity harder to guarantee.

Hosting in cloud storage
------------------------

Hosting stencils in cloud storage like S3 buckets or GitHub raw storage
introduces external dependencies, potentially complicating offline development
workflows. Also, depending on the provider, this type of hosting comes with
additional cost, which we’d like to avoid.

> Using Git LFS
> --------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using Git LFS
-------------
```

> Git LFS adds tool dependency for contributors, complicating the development

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Git Large File Storage (LFS) adds a tool dependency for contributors, complicating the development
```

workflow, especially for those who may not already use Git LFS. Git LFS does not
work well with offline workflows since files managed by LFS require an internet
connection to fetch when checking out specific commits, which is disruptive for

> even basic Git workflows. 

Reviewer 2: You could also mention there's a cost for using LFS (with free quota, but that also complicates things).

https://docs.github.com/en/billing/managing-billing-for-your-products/managing-billing-for-git-large-file-storage/about-billing-for-git-large-file-storage

PEP: 774
Title: Removing the LLVM requirement for JIT builds
Author: Savannah Ostrowski <savannah@python.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track

> Created: 26-Jan-2025

Reviewer 3: We normally say "Created" is when the PEP number was assigned / PR opened (2025-01-27 at 03:06 GMT)
```suggestion
Created: 27-Jan-2025
```

size.

It is important to note that this PEP is not a proposal to accept or reject the
JIT itself but rather to determine whether the build-time dependency on LLVM is
acceptable for JIT builds moving forward. If this PEP is rejected, we will
proceed with the status quo, retaining the LLVM build-time requirement. While
this dependency has served the JIT development process effectively thus far, it
introduces setup complexity and additional challenges that this PEP seeks to
alleviate.

Motivation
==========

At the Python Core Developer Sprint that took place in September 2024, there was
discussion about the next steps for the JIT - a related discussion also took
place on `GitHub <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/115869>`__. As part
of that discussion, there was also a clear appetite for removing the LLVM
requirement for JIT builds in preparation for shipping the JIT off by default in
3.14. The consensus at the sprint was that it would be sufficient to provide
pre-generated stencils for non-debug builds for Tier 1 platforms and that
checking these files into the CPython repo would be adequate for the limited

> number of platforms (though more options have been explored; see `Rejected
> Ideas <PEP 774 Rejected Ideas_>`__).

Reviewer 3: Headers are automatically reference targets within the document, so you should be able to simplify this (pt1)
```suggestion
number of platforms (though more options have been explored; see `Rejected
Ideas`_).
```

amounts to a difference of 0.03 MB per stencil file. This is a small increase in
the context of the overall repository size, which has grown by 2.55 MB in the
same time period. For six stencil files, this amounts to an upper bound of 0.18 MB.

These stencils could become larger in the future with changes to register
allocation, which would introduce 5-6 variants per instruction in each stencil
file (5-6x larger). However, if we ended up going this route, there are
additional modifications we could make to stencil files that could help
counteract this size increase (e.g., stripping comments, minimizing the
stencils). 

Specification
=============

This specification outlines the proposed changes to remove the build-time
dependency on LLVM and the contributor experience if this PEP is accepted.

Repository changes
------------------

The CPython repository would now host the pre-compiled JIT stencils in a new
subdirectory in ``Tools/jit`` called ``stencils/``. At present, the JIT is tested
and built for six platforms, so to start, we’d check in six stencil files. In
the future, we may check in additional stencil files if support for additional
platforms is desired or relevant.

> .. code-block:: bash
> 
>     cpython/
>         Tools/
>             jit/
>                 stencils/
>                     aarch64-apple-darwin.h 
>                     aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu.h
>                     i686-pc-windows-msvc.h 
>                     x86_64-apple-darwin.h
>                     x86_64-pc-windows-msvc.h 
>                     x86_64-pc-linux-gnu.h

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: text

    cpython/
        Tools/
            jit/
                stencils/
                    aarch64-apple-darwin.h 
                    aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu.h
                    i686-pc-windows-msvc.h 
                    x86_64-apple-darwin.h
                    x86_64-pc-windows-msvc.h 
                    x86_64-pc-linux-gnu.h
```

Workflow
--------

> To cover the workflow changes, this section can be divided into two parts -
> building CPython with the JIT enabled and working on the JIT’s implementation. 

Reviewer 3: A suggestion, though this section is so short it might not need an introductory sentence.
```suggestion
The workflow changes can be split into two parts, namely
building CPython with the JIT enabled and working on the JIT's implementation.
```

Building CPython with the JIT
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Precompiled JIT stencil files will be stored in the ``Tools/jit/stencils``
directory, with each file name corresponding to its target triple as outlined
above. At build time, we determine whether to use the checked in stencils or to

> generate a new stencil for the user’s platform. Specifically, for contributors

Reviewer 3: Minor request, but please could you replace `’` with `'` throughout? They're rendered as typographic quotation marks in the HTML output regardless, and future edits from those without editors that automatically insert fancy quotation marks lead to stylistic drift!
```suggestion
generate a new stencil for the user's platform. Specifically, for contributors
```

with LLVM installed, the ``build.py`` script in ``Tools/jit/stencils`` will allow
them to regenerate the stencil for their platform. Those without LLVM can rely
on the precompiled stencil files directly from the repository. 

Working on the JIT’s implementation (or touching JIT files)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In CI, stencil files will be automatically validated and updated when changes

Reviewer 3: I think this is the first use of the inititalism
```suggestion
In continuous integration (CI), stencil files will be automatically validated and updated when changes
```

patch file for convenience. You can download this aggregated patch, apply it
locally, and commit the updated stencils back to your branch. Then, the
subsequent CI run will pass.

Reference Implementation
========================

Key parts of the `reference implementation <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/129331>`__ include: 

- |CI|_: The CI workflow responsible for generating stencil patches.

- |jit_stencils|_: The directory where stencils are stored.

- |targets|_: The code to compile and parse the templates at build time.

.. |CI| replace:: ``.github/workflows/jit.yml``
.. _CI: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/.github/workflows/jit.yml

.. |jit_stencils| replace:: ``Tools/jit/stencils``
.. _jit_stencils: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/Tools/jit/stencils

.. |targets| replace:: ``Tools/jit/_targets``
.. _targets: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/Tools/jit/_targets.py

Ignoring the stencils themselves and any necessary JIT README changes, the
changes to the source code to support reproducible stencil generation and
hosting are minimal (around 150 lines of changes).

> .. _PEP 774 Rejected Ideas:
> 

Reviewer 3: Headers are automatically reference targets within the document, so you should be able to simplify this (pt2)
```suggestion
```

error-prone for contributors and maintainers. 

Using Git subtrees
------------------

When using subtrees, the embedded repository becomes part of the main
repository, similar to what’s being proposed in this PEP. However, subtrees
require additional tooling and steps for maintenance, which adds unnecessary
complexity to workflows.

Hosting in a separate repository
--------------------------------

While splitting JIT stencils into a separate repository avoids the storage
overhead associated with hosting the stencils, it adds complexity to the build
process. Additional tooling would be required to fetch the stencils and
potentially create additional and unnecessary failure points in the workflow.
This separation also makes it harder to ensure consistency between the stencils
and the CPython source tree, as updates must be coordinated across the
repositories. Finally, this approach introduces an attack vector, as external
repositories are less integrated with our workflows, making provenance and
integrity harder to guarantee.

Hosting in cloud storage
------------------------

Hosting stencils in cloud storage like S3 buckets or GitHub raw storage

> introduces external dependencies, potentially complicating offline development

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
introduces external dependencies, complicating offline development
```

Rationale
=========

This PEP proposes checking JIT stencils directly into the CPython repo as the
best path forward for eliminating our build-time dependency on LLVM.

This approach: 

* Provides the best end-to-end experience for those looking to build CPython 
  with the JIT
* Lessens the barrier to entry for those looking to contribute to the JIT 
* Ensures builds remain reproducible and consistent across platforms without 
  relying on external infrastructure or download mechanisms 
* Eliminates variability introduced by network conditions or potential
  discrepancies between hosted files and the CPython repository state, and 
* Subjects stencils to the same review processes we have for all other JIT-related
  code

However, this approach does result in a slight increase in overall
repository size. Comparing repo growth on commits over the past 90 days, the 
difference between the actual commits and the same commits with stencils added
amounts to a difference of 0.03 MB per stencil file. This is a small increase in
the context of the overall repository size, which has grown by 2.55 MB in the
same time period. For six stencil files, this amounts to an upper bound of 0.18 MB.

> The current total size of the stencil files for all six platforms is 7.2MB.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The current total size of the stencil files for all six platforms is 7.2 MB.
```
